Now here's something I've learned I have
learned over the years
which is that anytime we are talking
about niche commodities,
um it's often like harder to find
anything resembling spot prices at all
including a lot of the rare earths and
stuff. There's actually literally
nothing on the terminal about helium
pricing and I tell us about why that is.
>> Yeah, so it's a pretty unique market. I
mean there used to be more markets like
this but uh companies like Bloomberg and
many others have helped to make things a
lot more efficient.
Yeah, in general the price at the price
to the end user it's considered to be
about a 6 billion cubic foot per year
market and worth about $6 billion a
year. So that implies about $1,000 per
MCF to the end user and you know, that's
and and MCF is a thousand cubic feet.
That's the standard denomination that
they use in natural gas.
>> Okay. Um
you know, so that implies that it's a
dollar for one cubic foot. And uh since
you insisted on bringing a helium
balloon into the studio, uh I would fact
check you and say uh what did you pay
for that?
>> [music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Joe
Weisenthal. And [music] I'm Tracy
Alloway. Tracy, one of the things that
I've been learning over the last few
weeks
that a lot more [music] than oil comes
through. No, for real. Like say you
know, if someone says okay, there's war
breaking out in the Middle East, you
just think about oil, right? And then
that's probably actually where my mind
would typically stop. What's the price
of oil? And we all are watching the
price of oil, but there are a lot of
other things that are sourced from the
region that are critical import. I I'm
not joking. Like I used to have I'm just
saying like I'm laughing because we have
one of those things floating between us.
So speaking of stuff that comes out of
the Gulf region, here's here's one of
those things. Not
>> Listeners can't see it.
>> Not the aluminum itself, although
probably aluminum also comes out of the
Gulf, but helium.
>> Tracy's holding a helium balloon. She
went out and got a prop. I didn't. One
of our lovely producers did.
I have to say I haven't held a balloon
for a long time and it's surprisingly
entertaining. So okay, while you hold on
to it, I'll go a little bit further
which is I feel bad for the people in
helium because my understanding is that
the helium um has some pretty important
industrial prop uh properties. There's
not a lot of substitutes for it, but
someone says helium and they're like oh,
the clowns are going to be able to make
their funny voices etc.
>> any chance we have to actually bring one
of the commodities that we talk about on
the show into the studio, I'm going to
seize. So here is some helium.
>> Well look, the fact that the balloon is
floating
is an indicator of the fact that it must
have some interesting properties as an
element that perhaps
you know, perhaps have other
applications. I don't know. I mean it
tells you something about it as an
element, right?
>> Well, it's funny you mention that cuz
initially I was going to take this
balloon and you know, do the thing where
you breathe in the helium and have the
funny voice. Well, I thought for an
audio medium maybe it would work, but
then in the course of researching on
helium, uh I read about apparently it
comes partially from radioactive decay
and so I thought well, maybe maybe I
don't want to be breathing in the
helium. Although I also read that it's
non-toxic. So I don't know. We need to
talk about what helium actually is
clearly. That's right. And we've been
getting requests for a helium episode
ever since there was a headline out
today uh uh Qatar uh some helium
production
um that is not going to that one of
those force majeures or something like
that. I don't know.
Uh whatever or something not coming out.
Anyway, there's been a lot of requests
for a helium episode. We've never done
one. Incidentally, years ago I used to
lift weights with this guy in the East
Village who's like sort of an
entrepreneur and stuff like that.
>> Helium filled weights?
>> He would no, but he was in helium Among
other things he's one of these guys that
has his like finger hands in everything
and he also had like a helium venture.
And he's like oh, you got to talk to my
friend. One day you guys should do an
episode on helium. And then I got
connected with our guest who we're about
to introduce in a second. And I said
hey, do you know this guy in the East
Village? Cuz okay, maybe like not
everyone in Canada knows each other, but
everyone in um everyone in the helium
industry almost certainly knows each
other. He's like oh yeah, of course I
know that guy uh who used to lift
weights with.
>> It does seem to be a small concentrated
industry which is why we're talking
about it today.
>> Which is why we're talking about today.
Anyway, what is helium? Why is it
important? Where do we get it? What is
why is it impaired right now? Many
questions that people want answered.
Very excited to say we do have the
perfect guest. We're going to be
speaking with Nick Snyder, founder and
CEO of North American Helium which mines
and sells helium out of Canada. So Nick,
thank you so much for coming on Odd
Lots.
Joe, Tracy, thanks for having me. How
annoyed are you that like if That we
brought a balloon?
>> they just say oh, I have the helium
company and like everyone 99% of the
time people are just going to think
that's like the thing for balloons and
therefore can't be that important. You
know, I've gotten used to it. I I've got
young kids and
they had a
a exercise at school asking them what
their parents did and they said that I
blow up balloons. So the teachers
definitely think I'm a clown and uh
you know, we've got we all get used to
it. Okay, well why don't we ask in all
seriousness, what are the industrial
applications for helium beyond
entertaining us uh in balloon form? So
the biggest demand source which you've
probably seen in the news a little bit
uh because of the events in Iran is
manufacturing semiconductors. And beyond
that, one of the fastest growing end
uses is for launching rockets for space
exploration and then there's a number of
pretty durable long-standing uses
including
leak detection for everything from every
cell in an electric battery to all sorts
of complex machinery, manufacturing
fiber optics, titanium, MRIs and NMR for
drug discovery. It's you know, pretty
well used across all of technology.
All right, so what is it about the
element helium that gives it these
properties such that it is useful in
what you described as a fairly wide
range of industrial applications? So
what makes it so useful is it's got
three or four things going for it that
are completely unique. One is that it
has the lowest boiling point of anything
in nature. So liquid helium is
uh
about 4° Kelvin. I don't have my uh
you know, conversion in front of me. I
think that's uh
you know, -270
something degrees Celsius. So it's the
coldest substance on Earth. And that's
really important for any sort of
superconducting magnets. Google says
that's -452°
Fahrenheit. So yeah, that's quite cold.
>> We're Canadian company. We use Celsius.
>> [laughter]
>> Kelvin is our common language. We don't
have to fight Fahrenheit versus Celsius
here. We're going to clasp hands with
Kelvin. Anyway, keep going. So just the
boiling point alone makes it very unique
and and important. So if you want to
have something very cold and that's
primarily low temperature physics and
superconductors, you need to use liquid
helium for that. But um the boiling
point is also important for launching
rockets because if you're launching
rockets, you can't pump the liquid
rocket fuel into the engine fast enough
because of the volume is so large. So
you need to pressurize those rockets and
that is primarily done with helium
because it is lightweight, but also it's
the only substance that is non-reactive
that remains a gas at the temperature of
liquid oxygen or liquid kerosene. Hm.
Okay, and where does helium come from?
Well, we we forgot about all the other
important parts of uh what makes helium
unique.
>> keep going.
Yeah, yeah, keep going. Yeah, yeah, keep
going. I thought you were done. Yeah,
sorry. Keep going. Yeah, sorry. So it
also in addition to being a very cold
substance as a liquid, it's also
um
it's a great heat transfer medium. So if
you think about uh
you know, the fiberglass insulation in
your walls is a good insulator and the
copper pot you cook eggs in is a good
heat transfer medium. No one really
thinks about that with gases, but helium
is very good at transferring heat. So if
you were
a deep sea diver that they breathe a
helium oxygen mix mixture so that they
don't get nitrogen narcosis.
When they're in that high helium
atmosphere, they have to heat their
habitat to about 98° or they'll start
shivering because nitrogen's a very good
insulator and helium is a very good
conductor of heat. And that becomes
important in semiconductor manufacturing
because as they're doing the lithography
process, they need a carrier gas that is
a small molecule and helium is the
smallest molecule in nature that's also
um something that can transfer heat away
to avoid errors uh and also is
non-reactive. So really what makes
helium demand so durable in some of
these applications is that you're using
more than one of the unique
uh you know, attributes of the molecule.
Wait, just to be clear on semiconductor
lithography, the actual etching, how is
the helium used in that process? Is it
just like in the environment around to
keep it cool or like how is it being
deployed? So I I I'm not an expert here.
I don't want to get out of my depth, but
basically, you know, they have
a light source and a mask and then they
have to deposit something on there. That
is vapor deposition. They need a carrier
gas for whatever they're depositing on
there and they need that to be um
you know, something with a very high
heat transfer rate and also a small
molecule. They use it in a bunch of
other parts of the semiconductor
process, but a lot of them like cooling
the backside of the wafer Right. um you
can recycle. It's the lithography
process where they're essentially
polluting the helium with
um you know other volatile compounds.
That's what's causing demand to grow so
quickly in semiconductors and I've seen
estimates that the new leading edge
chips use 10 times more helium per chip
than older technologies. So, the helium
demand from that sector is growing at
roughly double the volume silicon from
that sector is growing.
Okay, and I feel very after school
special asking this next question while
next to a balloon. But, where does
helium actually come from?
So, helium is only created on Earth by
as you said radioactive decay of uranium
and thorium.
Helium itself is not radioactive and
divers can breathe it as long as there's
oxygen in there as well.
What's interesting about helium is that
unlike any other critical mineral, once
you use it it leaves the atmosphere. So,
you can't go get it out of a landfill
after the fact. So, that means that you
can only find helium on Earth
underground where it's been trapped. And
the generation time scales are roughly
an order of magnitude larger than for
oil and gas. So,
an oil and gas deposit might have taken
10 million years to be created in
helium. You're talking about hundreds of
millions of years because it's a very
slow process.
And then what's its connection? So,
yours we're going to get to North
American Helium and the deposits that
you have access to. But, there's there's
helium deposits and then helium also
emerges as a byproduct of natural gas.
So, talk to us about how helium comes
out of the ground typically out you know
if we're talking about the Middle East
somewhere Qatar where there's a lot of
gas versus say where you're mining
helium. And then we'll get into some of
these different processes.
So, that's really primarily a function
of exploration.
Helium is much more rare than natural
gas, but most of the world's helium
supply comes as a byproduct of natural
gas because there's been a huge amount
of exploration drilling for natural gas.
So, that's where they found it. And
there's
one you know gigantic field in the US
mid-continent called the Hugoton that's
been on production for 100 years. That's
what we used to originally fill the
federal helium reserve. The
the field in Qatar which they share with
Iran
although Iran is not able to extract
helium. That has 1/20 of 1% helium in
it. So, it's a very very small quantity,
but because they're doing so much
pre-treatment because there's hydrogen
sulfide in the gas and because the scale
of their LNG facility is so large,
that's the largest single source of
helium in the world. This is really
helpful because I just sort of you know
when we do these things like where does
that thing come from? It's like all
these byproducts. And so I assumed that
helium was yet just like another
byproduct thing that shows up anytime
you're looking for natural gas. But, it
sounds like no the reason it's there is
just cuz there's been a lot of a lot of
exploration in that area and they found
helium. But, that it's not inevitable
that anywhere you have natural gas
you're going to find helium.
>> Yeah.
So, actually on that note. So, if if I
go exploring for natural gas and I
happen to find a helium deposit, like
what happens to that helium if I decide
that I want to monetize it? Like how do
I actually extract it out of the ground?
How do I store it? Do I set up a helium
facility right next to where the deposit
actually is or do I move it somewhere
else? What's the next step in the
process? The way that the gas separation
process works is for the most part
you're actually separating everything
except for the helium because helium is
a small non-reactive molecule. You can't
just take that out. So,
for the most part
helium always shows up with nitrogen.
So, you'd already have a high nitrogen
content in the gas and then you're going
to remove the nitrogen and the methane
and be left with the helium which you
can then purify.
And there's really only a couple of
fields in the world. There's one field
in Algeria that's been on production for
a long time and it's falling off.
There's one field
in Siberia. There's
the field in the Middle East, the field
that's been depleting for a long time in
the US mid-continent. But, it is really
quite rare and if you think about what
are the ingredients you need for this,
you need to have an area with uranium
and thorium and we sort of know where
that is because the US and the Russians
during the Cold War looked all over the
world for uranium. And you need to have
an area where you've got a sedimentary
basin where you're going to have
traditional oil reservoir rocks. You're
sort of looking for a sandstone.
And in general you're looking for an
area where there aren't any mountains
because it's a small molecule that wants
to escape to the surface. So, if you are
in a tectonic area,
that's going to be a big problem for
you. That's interesting. So, the
existence of mountains implies I hadn't
thought about that at all. I would have
said oh mountains that's great. It's
probably more
more deeply buried less less place for
it to escape. But, the existence of
mountains implies tectonic activity and
that's how you get leaks. Super
interesting. Do they have it in
Kazakhstan? I know they have a lot of
uranium there. Is there helium in
Kazakhstan? I think there's a little bit
of helium content in one of the stranded
gas fields there. I certainly there's no
production there. And again, you know,
the
the LNG operation in Qatar is somewhat
unique with a very small helium content.
If you were to go drill for helium in
North America
and you're not going to have one of the
world's largest LNG complexes there.
Generally 1/3 of 1% is sort of
considered an economic cutoff for the
helium content.
Is it true we used to have a strategic
helium a national helium reserve? I
can't believe we don't have a strategic
pork reserve, but there was a federal
helium reserve. Once upon a time when
our government was very foresighted, we
did build a helium reserve during the
Cold War which was a brilliant idea both
because
helium's an important thing to have, but
also because that gas would have been
vented otherwise. And you know a good
example of this is uh
in Algeria they have one field with a
helium content that mixes in with
everything else.
If they're making LNG from the gas
stream in Algeria, then they can recover
the helium. But, if they're putting it
into the pipeline to Europe which
unfortunately is where the majority of
it's going right now because gas prices
are very high in Europe,
it can't be recovered and that helium
when you turn on your stove is just
going to escape into the atmosphere. Oh,
that's really interesting. So, even if
you don't have a market or an easy way
to sell it at the time, what the what
the strategic reserve did was allow us
to capture something that would have
been otherwise lost permanently had we
not had the sync. So, tell us the story
evidently we don't have it anymore. What
was in it? Where was it and where did it
go? Who did we sell it to? What
happened? So, it was primarily the
helium that was
the Hugoton field which is this very
large field
across Texas and and Oklahoma parts of
Kansas.
That
>> wasn't it?
So, the the field is very large. The gas
production from that we started
recovering helium. We were always the
you know sort of
Saudi Arabia of helium if you will.
You know, a side note there is that
the Hindenburg was designed for helium
and the US Senate blocked export of
helium for military reasons to Germany
and that's why they filled it up with
hydrogen instead.
Huh.
>> this has been going on for a while and
you know we talk about it being a small
molecule and difficult to trap
underground. A good example of that is
when it was first found in Kansas.
Originally helium was discovered by
looking at the sun during an eclipse and
someone was able to see from the
spectral lines that there's another
element out here. And then they found an
inert gas well in Kansas and they were
able to
you know distill the helium basically by
putting the gas through a bunch of
really narrow glass tubes and the helium
will go through the glass because it's
such a small molecule and that's how
they were able to distill it.
So, anyways we built
the world's only helium reserve during
the Cold War and this is something that
the science community was very excited
about because they recognized that
this is really important for a bunch of
science and physics, but more
importantly if you think about the long
term
we're living in
interesting times in many ways, but an
interesting time if you think very long
term in terms of
the last 100 years had seen drilling for
natural gas all over the place and
particularly for conventional deposits.
It's important to understand you can't
find helium in economic quantities in
unconventional resources like shale. So,
prior to our company the last new
discovery of helium that was
commercialized in North America was 50
years ago. The oil and gas companies
aren't looking for these conventional
fields anymore. But,
you know, the American Physical Society
got very upset when we talked about
selling off the helium reserve and they
said basically
this is a
a molecule that's only getting more
important. We're finding more and more
uses for it. And if you think about
today, what are some future uses?
They're using this for quantum computing
to keep things very cold. They're using
it for nuclear fusion for the
superconducting magnets. They're now
using it and I think X Energy just filed
for an IPO. Those are helium cooled
fusion reactors that they're building
SMRs,
um because
Look, if you think about Fukushima,
that was a water-cooled reactor and the
water got hot and then the water turned
into steam and it got so hot that the
steam separated into hydrogen and oxygen
and then things blew up. But because
helium is such a good heat transfer
medium, you can use helium as the
primary loop there and in these reactors
and it makes it passively safe. So, the
physics community was very up in arms
when we decided to sell this off because
they said, you know, what happens 50
years from now when we need this for
space exploration and quantum computing
and everything else and um there's no
one drilling for conventional gas
anymore. So, you know, that's sort of
the issue there and um
you know, we can get into why we sold it
off and we'll be getting into that
later.
>> I can't imagine like, oh, we bought the
strategic helium reserve, let's just go
make a bunch of balloons. Like I assume
that didn't happen. So, where who who
bought it and what they do with it? So,
we actually stockpiled two things during
the Cold War, helium and tin. Tin is
also used for semiconductors. We sold
them both off um prior to right now when
we started building semiconductor fabs
in the US. So, that's sort of a
you know, not a great choice
necessarily. Uh with regard to the
helium reserve, when they originally
started they took the helium out of the
gas stream and to your point, Tracy,
they put it into an old natural gas
field in in Amarillo. So, that's why the
helium reserve was there and they filled
that up. Um
but the government never appropriated
funds to pay for the helium. So, the
Bureau of Land Management or their
predecessor
basically owed the government $300
million for this
because no funds were appropriated. And
that $300 million was accruing interest
to the point where
I think in 1996, Newt Gingrich got into
power and it was time to start talking
about privatizing things and Christopher
Cox went to the House floor and
basically said, you know, do you know
the government and this dumb government
has $1.4 billion of party balloon debt?
And uh a bill was quickly passed and uh
you know, signed by Clinton and uh we
decided to sell the whole thing off. The
original plan, I believe, was to sell it
off
in equal parts over 30 years for exactly
$1.4 billion with no regard to the
market, just to pay off the government's
so-called party balloon debt. And the
physics community was up in arms about
this, but um you know, they don't have
that many senators.
That's amazing and I feel like we could
do a whole episode just on the um helium
reserve, but a
serious question, I guess, or maybe a
related question. How difficult is
helium to store because we're used to,
you know, maybe you go into the the
party balloon shop in the party balloon
district of um downtown New York and you
see canisters of helium gas lying there.
But on the other hand, I imagine you're
talking about the world's smallest
molecule, as you've said,
it must escape quite easily.
So, if
if you decide to get into the party
balloon business and you're going to
take over where Party City left off, um
you know, by the way,
the only time people usually, you you
know,
friends on the street bring up helium
with me is every time there's a helium
shortage and we're now looking at
probably the fifth in the last 20 years,
Party City goes bankrupt.
>> [laughter]
>> And that's the big event in the
industry. Um but if you wanted to get
into that industry and you wanted to get
canisters of helium and I hope uh being
an honest person, you would get
canisters of pure helium because I've
heard a lot about people uh you know,
going 50/50 and your balloons don't uh
stay in the air as long as you remember
them when you were a kid. Um
the helium will be leaking around the
threads of the valve um
you know, a little bit each day. And
the world trade of helium is actually
done in the form of a liquid um where a
liquid helium ISO container can be put
on a ship. It can hold
roughly five times more than a what used
to be called a tube trailer of you know,
sort of a
2-ft in diameter 40-ft long tube and
you'll see these on the highway where
there's about 10 of them stacked on the
back of a tractor trailer. That that's a
steel tube trailer. Now, because of the
hydrogen industry, there is carbon fiber
overwrap trailers that can hold about a
third as much as a liquid helium
container. So, it changes the
transportation differential a little bit
and that's what we use, but it's shipped
around the world as a liquid and as a
liquid, it is perishable. So,
that's part of the reason that whenever
you know, the sort of the timeline here
is I have nothing interesting to say
about geopolitics, but the Qataris have
said they are going to wait until
hostilities have ceased and then they
will restart LNG production. And I read
that it'll take three or four weeks or
something.
The helium industry is going to take
longer than that to recover from this
because there's only about 3,000 of
these liquid helium containers in the
world. They're highly highly specialized
because you're talking about taking a
huge amount by weight of liquid helium,
which is at 4° Kelvin, and putting it in
a container where it's essentially a
very fancy thermos, but this has to be
hardy enough that you can put it on a
truck and put it on a ship. Um
but it's warming up the whole time. And
the very best containers can hold the
helium for about 45 days before the
pressure gets too high and they'll
essentially vent themselves.
So, it makes it very perishable and it
makes the containers very important
where
you know,
I would assume that the Qatari LNG
facilities have filled a lot of liquid
helium containers that are now stuck
somewhere. And those are slowly warming
up. And on the other hand, to deal with
a crisis like this, the big industrial
gas companies are now going to have to
scramble to move containers to other
sources to try and get helium out of
storage where they've built some private
storage since the you know, Federal
Reserve is now essentially gone. Um and
that's going to cause a lot of problems
because it's just a very limited supply
of these. I just want to say and I I
really mean this with no offense, but
anytime that we have a guest to sort of
is talking a lot about science and
technology, I do a little bit of live
fact-checking. I like look up all these
things and it's like, yep, we really did
have something called the helium
privatization act in 2016 just about
$1.3 billion.
>> And party balloon debt. It really is
perceived to be important in quantum
computing. It really is perceived to be
important in small modular reactor. So,
all I just
you know, for the listeners out there
because I can't, you know, I don't know
anything about any of this stuff. Um
this all seems to check out. Helium
seems to be pretty important. Now,
here's something I've learned I have
learned over the years
which is that anytime we are talking
about niche commodities, um it's often
like harder to find anything resembling
spot prices at all, including a lot of
the rare earths and stuff. Sometimes
that you'll see these tickers, but
they're like ancient or not up to date
or whatever or whatever that maybe there
was a futures market at one point, but
it like got discontinued in 2018 or
something. There's actually literally
nothing on the terminal about helium
pricing and I tell us about why that is
and how what is how transparent is the
helium market and what is it
what is the cost of a ton of helium or
whatever? What is the denomination of
helium uh in terms of how much is sold
in a chunk? Tell us about that market.
Yeah, so it's a pretty unique market. I
mean, there used to be more markets like
this, but uh companies like Bloomberg
and many others have helped to make
things a lot more efficient.
>> [clears throat]
>> In general, the price at the price to
the end user,
it's considered to be about a 6 billion
cubic foot per year market and worth
about $6 billion a year. So, that
implies about $1,000 per MCF to the end
user. And you know, that's MCF is 1,000
cubic feet. That's the standard
denomination that they use in natural
gas.
>> Okay. Um
you know, so that implies that it's a
dollar for one cubic foot. And since you
insisted on bringing a helium balloon
into the studio, I would fact-check you
and say, uh what did you pay for that?
Oh, well, I I actually don't know cuz
>> more than a dollar. Yeah. And definitely
that's not a cubic foot.
>> going to ask our producer and then he
can uh tell us in a few minutes.
>> But keep going while while we wait for a
response for our producer, why don't you
tell us about the the current market
environment and how 2026 looks versus
2025 versus 2016, etc. So, the market
had been trending down since the last
shortage which ended in around 2022 when
the Russians brought production online
and that was a bit of a surprise to the
industry because um a German firm,
Linde, had been involved with building
the Russian facility, their Amur Gas
Project, which processes natural gas
liquids and other things out of a big
gas stream and also recovers the helium
from their Chayanda and Kovykta fields.
And um the general consensus because of
the Ukraine war is that the Russians
wouldn't be able to get that plant to
run without the help of the Germans. And
you know, they started up the first
train and um had a very large fire and
they started up the second train and uh
had a very large explosion. So, everyone
has sort of written that off, but they
were
you know, able to get that production up
and running and start bringing it into
the market. There are sanctions on
bringing liquid helium containers to
sanctions might not be the right word,
but I believe there's a State Department
restriction on taking liquid helium
containers from the US to Russia because
it's dual use, it could have a military
application. Um there's also sanctions
on taking Russian helium at all the
places like Europe. So, the Russians
went into production and basically
flooded the Chinese market and it sort
of spread out from there a little bit.
It's somewhat limited the impact they
were able to have because of the lack of
liquid helium containers, the lack of
end markets for them, but prices have
been trending down. I will say, you
know, in answer to your question, why
isn't it obvious what the helium price
is? There's a confidentiality clause in
every helium contract. So, we sell on
long-term contracts primarily to the big
industrial gas companies, but those are
all confidential and um
you know, I don't know.
Certainly from the commodity trader
point of view, having an opaque market
probably is uh you know, pretty good
thing, but
>> Yeah.
maybe that originated with the fact that
the government was selling the helium
for uh exactly 1.4 billion and uh no one
wanted to, you know, have a futures
market there, but also
as you guys know, you know, futures
markets sort of need to be deliverable.
And there's no longer any sort of global
hub. You could have potentially, when
the Federal Reserve was a public
facility where you could inject gas back
into it, you could have built a futures
market around that, but no one did. It
kind of reminds me of um
plane delivery contracts where, you
know, the announcement comes out and
it's always at a list price. So, you
know, like an airline buys a hundred
million dollars worth of Boeing planes,
but the contracts are so custom and
opaque and individualized that like no
one really ever knows how much they sold
it for.
>> and so that's super interesting. Um, our
producer Dash, by the way, got back to
us and he says uh the balloon cost $9,
which is more than I would have
expected. But what do I know about
balloons?
>> But where do helium prices
>> Yeah, well.
Well, now wait a second. Actually, I
want to talk about that. So,
first of all, from from your vantage
point in the market, what supply
disruptions are you seeing right now?
And then secondly, how long does it
actually take those disruptions to work
their way into the market and start to
hit prices given that we just talked
about how most of the stuff is selling
on a very long-term forward basis. Yeah,
well well, the second part of your
question is particularly germane, but
um
you know, the Qatari facilities in total
uh were producing north of 30% of world
helium supply and given that there's no
federal helium reserve anymore and given
that this is a, you know, a perishable
commodity essentially um because it
starts warming up once you fill a liquid
helium container,
that's a huge problem. The longer this
goes on, it becomes more and more of a
problem. Um, but to your point on
timing,
you know, there's
uh a leading helium consultant who we've
worked with for a long time who I think
put it very well where he described the
situation last week as it's like a
tsunami where the water is already gone
out, but we're all still on the beach
and the wave hasn't hit yet. And the
last cargoes that left Qatar are
probably just now getting delivered to
customers. So, you know, the real
problems are coming in the next month.
This is how everyone, by the way, in
energies are thinking about this moment
right now cuz by and large you know,
energy markets are up for oil, gas,
etc., but maybe, you know, not hyper
catastrophic levels and everyone's like,
this better open up soon cuz the water
has come out and we're going to have
real problems the longer we have
um these disruptions. It's interesting,
too, like this idea that you're you
know, here's something I wondered about
and it it again relates to the um some
of the conversations we've had about
rare earths in the past.
This the nominal size of this market,
even right now, does not sound very
large, a six billion dollar global
market. This is the same thing we talked
to Javier Blas here at Bloomberg about
rare earths. The the total dollar
amounts for this stuff are not that
high. And I it always makes me wonder,
does that impair exploration and
production appetites that it's like,
look, yeah, we could go looking for new
fields, we could drill here, etc., but
this just isn't even in the best of
times it's not going to be a great
market and so we have like other things
on our mind to do and I'm curious like
whether small nominal markets make it
harder to mobilize capital. 100% and you
know, I I I don't know what price of
uranium is today, but that's a similarly
sized market and you know, what you see
in these industries when prices
you know, go up or there's a shortage is
essentially
people start uh doing exploration at the
desk where they're saying, who almost
found this in the past because it's too
expensive to go do it
um you know, from first principles. If
you think about the size of the oil and
gas market, it's
what, hundreds of times larger than
helium? So,
you know, the only people who could
afford to explore at scale in North
America were the oil and gas drillers.
Um, so we found a niche where we were
able to do that because it's a lot
cheaper than in some other places, but
um that is really what separates us as a
company in terms of we've been focused
on grassroots exploration saying the
best stuff hasn't been found yet and um
you know, in those other industries
I I think that's a problem
going forward for a number of
critical minerals and niche commodities
where you can say, well,
hypothetically, there's rare earths in
North Carolina, but
how much do you want to spend looking
for them cuz it can cost hundreds of
millions of dollars to go drill holes in
the ground. You know, you said earlier
that there'd been five previous helium
shortages um I guess in in recent times.
What happened during those? Like how
much substitution did you see of
alternative gases? I guess I don't know
what those would be, neon maybe. Um, and
then how much rerouting did you see from
like one geographic area to another?
Like I I guess what I'm asking is how
flexible is the industry that relies on
helium?
So, answering that in reverse,
you know, the industrial gas companies
that
really distribute the helium and move it
around the world and break it into
smaller quantities to serve the end
user,
they do a phenomenal job with this, but
it's a very very difficult problem. So,
when there's a shortage, there's
absolutely a problem particularly
because of the specialized logistics and
there's not, you know, a bunch of
extra helium containers lying around and
things like that.
Um
you know,
in terms of what was your question about
the previous helium shortages? Yeah,
basically, how much substitution did you
see? Like are there other gases like
neon that you can use instead of helium?
And that basically just how easy is it
for people to adapt to an actual helium
shortage? So, the first shortage was in
2007 and back then we had a lot more
options in terms of
you know,
in Europe, they've never really had a
lot of helium the way we have in the US.
So, for that reason, they don't really
have party balloons over there, which is
the most visible thing for the average
person.
>> that. Uh
but they also have always used a lot
more argon in welding.
Um, helium is used in inert gas welding
because it is inert, because it has high
heat transfer. Um, they've always used
more argon, we've always used more
helium in the US and there was a lot of
substitution of saying, okay, we still
need helium if you're welding stainless
steel, titanium, aluminum, if you're
doing thicker welds, but in some of the
lower spec welding applications, we were
able to substitute argon. And you've
also seen recycling where
um
you know, if you're doing semiconductor
lithography, you can't really recycle
because you're putting other things in
the gas, but if you're purely doing it
for a cooling loop, you can start to
recycle. And my understanding is that
the MRI manufacturers prior to 2007,
they would build an MRI, fill it up with
liquid helium, make sure it works at the
factory, and then just vent it into the
atmosphere and ship the unit and it
would be refilled when it got there. So,
there's certainly been demand
destruction from that. The other side of
that coin is that there's very little
opportunity for additional recycling or
additional substitution at this point
and you know, I sort of tell people,
if you're still using helium after four
global shortages, you have to use
helium.
There are balloon there are helium
balloons in Europe. I fact-checked that.
They they do exist. They they're perhaps
not
as popular.
>> I actually found a uh
this is a very European this is the most
European looking document I've ever
seen, which is this really serious like
think tank report on the intentional
release
of balloons and confetti in the Baltic
Sea area scoping study, a collection of
the existing best packed prac
information, regulation and best
practices published by the Baltic Marine
Environment Protection Commission. It's
a 50-page paper on the release of
balloons. Anyway, sorry, but I take your
point that I'm and I but I also found a
Reddit post someone asking where they
can get helium balloons. So, maybe
they're not Well, if if the EU has
regulations on it, I'm willing to
believe they've got it.
No,
>> [laughter]
>> there's you know, the thing the big
takeaway I have from this conversation I
mean conversation, it's just going back
to thinking about that 30-year release
schedule from the helium reserve. And
especially if you're not doing it at
something resembling a market price,
that must have just obliterated any like
private sector activity because if
there's going to be this fixed supply
coming out to the market and it's not
even price sensitive in any way, why
would you ever like build out private
production at that point? 100% that
that's, you know, been a big issue and
you know, when I first started looking
at this issue in 2011 because my dad was
involved in uh
you know, trying to advocate for fusion
fission hybrid reactors and he chaired a
Brookings MIT conference on this and he
was very disappointed. He said the
smartest guy there told him he was
wasting his time because we were going
to run out of helium before they could
get the technology working and uh you
know, I fully he called me and I said I
thought that was for party balloons. Now
I'm cursed to be on the other side of
that conversation for the rest of my
life, but the American Physical Society
at at the time, you know, put out uh a
statement saying
not only should you not sell this,
helium is the one thing we should be
building a bigger stockpile of for the
future.
And um you know, I sort of compared the
situation to what happened in your with
uranium um in the megatons to megawatts
program after the fall of the Soviet
Union. We took a bunch of their former
Soviet nuclear weapons, we turned them
into power plant fuel uh just because of
proliferation reasons and sold that into
the market and similar thing, you know,
you dump a bunch of supply into the
market for a long time and then there's
no incentive for exploration and uranium
prices went up, you know, 500% in the
early 2000s. So uh that's certainly been
a factor in terms of you know, why
haven't people been doing this the whole
time.
Well, okay, on that note, you're the
founder and CEO of North American Helium
and we know that helium prices are going
up even though we don't have a very good
benchmark. Um but you know,
broadly we know that uh it's going to
get more expensive. What do you do with
that price signal? Do you invest more?
Do you expand given the limitations
around you know,
exploring for LNG and things like that?
What do you do?
We're on the unique end of the spectrum
in the industry because we're not
running
a $10 billion LNG project or something
like that because we're producing we're
we're only drilling for helium from
non-hydrocarbon sources. So we're
essentially looking for we're drilling
into older rocks that predate plant life
on Earth. So there's not a lot of
organic material there. Um so you're
drilling for fields of helium and
nitrogen and these exist and
um you know, where we are primarily
operating in Southwest Saskatchewan in
Canada,
they had found a field like this in the
1960s. They wrote helium legislation
which made them very unique. Um but
because of the combination of the forced
sales from the federal stockpile keeping
helium prices low and nitrogen being
worthless because it's already 80% of
the atmosphere, no one ever came back
and looked at this. Um but we're
certainly
I I would say we were already going
pretty fast. Uh certainly in an
environment like this, you know, our
mission is to support science and
industry. So all of a sudden
this is a big problem. We're going to do
everything we can to increase our rate
of exploration, bringing new plants onto
production and um
you know, really trying to support some
of the most vital uh uses of helium. And
then we've had in previous shortages,
one of the problems is it's not a
question of
for the end user, it's not a question of
whether or not you get the helium or
not. Um
the consequences of not getting helium
across the value chain are pretty
significant. If you're Party City, you
go bankrupt.
Uh
if you're a chip manufacturer, you have
to shut down chip manufacturing and
that's, you know,
the the dollar amount there is just
tremendous.
Uh if you're running
you know, MRI or the their cousin NMR
which is used for drug discovery and
things like that, if that magnet heats
up, it will destroy the magnet. So
you're talking about your machine
getting destroyed essentially. Um so
we're very focused on supporting those
vital end uses and if people can't do as
much welding for a little while,
you know, it is what it is, but in
general the price is very volatile
because helium is a very small
percentage of the cost of goods sold for
all of these end uses.
Sorry, just to press on this point.
I'm going to assume that you're going to
make more money in the coming months as
a result of helium supply getting
squeezed in Qatar. What are the like
major choke points
at [clears throat] your company that you
would be trying to use that money to
resolve? Is it actually finding new
fields or is it investing in more
storage capacity, um transportation
investment? Like what are you going to
do with the money?
It's a little bit of all of the above.
Um you know, we
our our focus has always been on
you know, the the lack of reliability in
the supply chain which comes from two
things. One is the extreme concentration
where you've got one Exxon CO2 project
in Wyoming, it's a quarter of world
supply. You've got one LNG facility
that's a third of world supply. You've
now got uh you know, production in
Russia which has its own issues. So the
geopolitics and the concentration are a
problem. So we've been working for the
last 13 years to build a new helium hub,
to create, you know, helium supply from
non-hydrocarbon sources in Western
Canada and
for that reason we run a bunch of stuff
in parallel. So we'll be bringing a new
facility online that'll increase our
production by 40% later this year. We're
also drilling for, you know,
uh doing exploration for the next field.
We're also looking at doing much more
grassroots exploration for just
continuing to understand the area
because we have 9 million acres of
long-term helium rights. So it takes 3
hours to drive across it. This is uh
uh you know, we've identified a thousand
structures from seismic data that we
have not drilled yet.
Um so it's really all of those things.
One of the biggest things that we've
been looking at is building a helium
liquefier in Canada because right now
we have nine
facilities that are producing helium and
we truck all of that in carbon fiber
overwrap uh tube trailers down to
existing liquefiers in the US
midcontinent and there's a lot of extra
capacity down there because production's
been falling in the US for the last 35
years. But building a liquid helium uh a
helium liquefier rather
in Canada along the Trans-Canada Highway
which runs through the middle of our
properties
really lowers the cost. It also lowers
the emissions which is something people,
you know, cared a lot more about 4 years
ago, but we still think is important. Um
and opens up this area as more of a
global hub. And also
if you think about the high-end
customers,
they're very concerned with purity. The
average customer is taking liquid helium
at grade P which is sort of the industry
standard. You can think of it as
more or less five nines purity, 99.999%
pure. The leading edge chip
manufacturers are now looking for six
nines purity and right now that
primarily either comes from Exxon's
facility or it comes from Qatar. So
all of a sudden you've got a big issue
there and if you want to think about um
you know, I know you guys love all of
the weird logistical stuff. Um
there's only so many liquid helium
containers in the world. Yeah. And if
you want six nines purity, you don't
ever want to fill that with five nines
because you might get a molecule of
hydrogen in there. So those containers
are sort of kept separate and the fiber
optic manufacturers have their own
containers. So now you've got an issue
where the special containers for the
semiconductor firms are trapped
somewhere, they've got to go somewhere
else. You've got to say, well, we need
more of this from the Exxon facility and
maybe that's going to cause a problem
somewhere else. Uh but building our own
liquefier gives us the opportunity to,
you know, meet any purity and be able to
sort of
you know, kind of go farm to table with
the whole supply chain.
Mm. Farm to table
>> helium. Uh Nicklas Snyder, thank you so
much for coming on Odd Lots. I learned a
lot about helium in that conversation.
That was fantastic. Joe Tracy, thanks so
much. Really a pleasure. Tracy, I really
want to do a live episode one day in
Saskatchewan with Nicklas and Murad
Al-Khatib, the lentil king of
Saskatchewan. We got to have the helium
king of Saskatchewan and the lentil king
of Saskatchewan. I think that'd be a
great live event for us. I want to go
scout
uh
>> out the plains for helium
>> Yeah, yeah, yeah, me too. and lentils, I
guess. No, that was a fascinating
episode. I mean, all of these niche
commodities are fascinating. Um I will
say one thing that keeps getting
repeated on all of these shows and you
touched on it already is this idea that
we haven't actually seen the physical
impact just yet and it's coming down the
line and you can imagine there are a lot
of consumers of specific products out
there who for now are able to say, you
know,
we're doing all right,
but maybe a month, maybe 3 months, maybe
4 months if things keep going as they
are. And even frankly, if the war were
to stop tomorrow, you would probably
have some sort of impact. Yeah, you
know,
>> [sighs]
>> there's an
you know what it reminds me of?
You know,
May 2025, it's like the shortages are
coming to the shelves cuz of the
tariffs. Yeah. And they didn't and then
it's like
>> Well, but that was partially cuz Trump
>> Yeah, I know.
I know.
>> I know he did. He did. He did. But I do
think we're at like this weird moment
where it's like nothing ever happened,
but maybe it will. But yeah, but
everyone who we talked to in commodities
is essentially is like we're in the
phase where the water has come out and
the longer it takes for production to
restart and the strait to reopen, the
greater the damage is going to be. You
know what I think is like really
interesting
i- about this conversation in particular
and there are actually from a sort of
economic standpoint it's several very
interesting threads in there. So first
of all, there's the part about how like
if you're selling helium at the same
clip every year for 30 years, you
destroy any sort of semblance of a
market and therefore private production.
That's interesting. Another interesting
thing is that okay, like helium itself
is sort of scarce and not all over the
place. And then the scarcity of the
containers to he kept coming back to the
containers.
>> Yeah. There aren't that many containers
in the world because of helium can go
through glass, that means it's so small
not a lot can trap in. Even the
containers that exist um can only hold
it for so long. And then the fact that
um the helium that's needed for the most
advanced science as he mentioned at the
end, they want the six nines purity not
the five nines purity. And so they have
their own separate um set of containers
that like it's almost impossible to
imagine like at this point like a sort
of like truly coordinated like commodity
helium just because kind of like natural
gas, so much of the story seems to be in
the shipping and holding of it rather
than the commodity per se.
>> No, it strikes me as very similar um and
like helium is even more nat gas than
nat gas, right? In the sense that we
don't even have any pricing to look at
basically.
>> basically, which is just shocking to me
as someone who's been staring at a
Bloomberg terminal for many many years.
It feels really weird when you can't get
a price of something. So there is so
like typically speaking if you enter in
any ticker in the terminal, something
will come up.
And there is actually a something
There's a helium found. No, there's a
helium index. But whatever it was, it
was put together by the Bureau of Land
Management.
>> And they ended it in 2018. Like they
stopped whatever collect whatever this
index is in 2018. So there is not a lot
of there is not a lot of data on helium.
And I found that to be the case with a
lot of the new show. Yeah, discontinued.
It's for historical purposes only
according to the DES page. Well, the
other weird thing about it is it doesn't
actually look that volatile at all.
Right.
No, I So I don't even believe the chart.
>> Yeah, exactly. Um okay, well, if anyone
wants to create some sort of pricing
index for helium, let us know. Yeah,
we'd love to check it out. Shall we
leave it there? Let's leave it there.
This has been another episode of the Odd
Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway. You can
follow me at Tracy Alloway. And I'm Joe
Weisenthal. You can follow me at The
Stalwart. Follow our producers Carmen
Rodriguez at Carmen, Erman Dasho Bennett
at Dashbot, and Caleb Brooks at Caleb
Brooks. And for more Odd Lots content,
you can go to bloomberg.com/odd
lots and you can find our daily
newsletter. And you can chat about all
of these topics including helium 24/7 in
our Discord discord.gg/odd
lots. And if you enjoyed this
conversation, then please leave a
comment or like the video or better yet,
subscribe. Thanks for watching.
>> [music]